Introductory comments for a few minutes, then that's great and then we will ask lots and lots of questions.
Just saying, I don't know if you follow where we've got to, but we're getting close to the end of hearing from everyone here from.
Probably like, I think we're trying to get MSC in here as well. We've been to see ports in here, we've had customers in here, we've had land-based transport,
we've had unions, so we've still got a few to go, but we're trying to get a coastal shipping,
trying to get just a picture overall, but we can then make some judgments on, but it's very important for us to have the major shipping lines in here.
So we're very grateful to be here.
Thank you and thank you for the opportunity to be here.
I think that this is an open statement certainly from the MSC. When we look at Zealand and the importance of trade for New Zealand and the fact that we're so far away from our markets,
very much we look at a very long, skinny supply chain.
Unlike other trades that we in the world where we have vessels that go round on to a number of ports and a number of countries,
there is the ability to mix and match cargo so that you drive in good utilization.
When we come to New Zealand, it's completely reliant on the trade into New Zealand and now the New Zealand to fill the vessel and drive the utilization both ways.
So what's very important for us is how those vessels work the coast, how they make sure that they are spending as less time as possible on the coast,
and are we doing the best for the New Zealand explorer and important returns of what the service that we're providing.
So what you'll see from our submission, there were four pillars around that that we believe that were important to drive this.
I'm happy to talk to them individually or we can do it.
I think if you want to highlight some key points that would be very useful.
So the key pillars that we see from in terms of if we're going to position ourselves in New Zealand for
the growth that we're looking to drive and also attack cost and efficiency.
When we look at New Zealand right now and you see there's roughly around about nine ports of which three are significant.
And then there's a lot of other ports and you say when you look at driving capacity, the ocean capacity around those ports,
what you do is you actually chew up important transit time.
So a network can spend seven to 10 days on the New Zealand coast.
So that means from the first port of loads to the last port of loads.
If you're on the first port, your transit to your key market is plus seven days than the last port.
So there's some inequities on the time that the ship's been on the water.
The model that we have run on the part where we run now and it's very successful is the hub and spoke model.
So that's really the first bit that we'll talk to.
What that really means in terms of the New Zealand operation is
where you focus your major network.
So for us it's the Southern Star which is our network that goes up to Tangent Pelopas.
So we need to look around a network.
Good meaning.
A ship.
Voyager ships.
So this network is called the Southern Star network.
It currently comes down.
It runs north-south through the coast.
It then goes up to Tangent Pelopas which is our major hub.
And from there we touch every service around the world.
So from there you'll go anywhere from North East Asia, South East Asia, South Asia, Africa,
Middle East, Europe.
So essentially you're arriving in Auckland, going down the coast, then departing.
Departing to Watch Armours today.
Watch Armours.
And going to Tangent Pelopas in Malaysia.
So then if you look at the length of time that's been on the coast and then you sort
of say okay well how could this be better?
So our view on life is we would look to, the New Zealand has established two hubs.
So you have one on the North Island, one on the South Island.
And then you would feed of those hubs either by an improved coastal network
or you would look at the infrastructure, land-based infrastructure to support that.
Like on the obvious one being rail.
So that would be Taungalutton?
I don't like to put names on ports.
But you'd have to pick, in the North Island Taungalut would be a strong contender.
South Island would be a question of how you'd look at that.
And to support that you need the coastal network that's going to support that.
In the South Island you could argue that Eastern Seaboard, that could be rail, right?
If you look at the North Island, when you've got places like Nelson and Napier,
which are Nelson and South Island, but Napier and North Island which aren't
as well serviced by rail, then you'd need to have a coastal network.
To support that we would need some changes in the legislation just around the coastal network.
Because the legislation sort of precludes us operating efficiently around the coast.
And that's the same for any ocean carrier.
The second leg of the discussion is the operational performance of some of the container terminals.
We need to really nail down how we get some improvements in that space.
If you look at the major New Zealand ports, they're all in the bottom
portal, put to World Bank ratings on Efficiency and Dadaewoo.
There is some work that's been done in Taungalut which will help if it comes through.
But it doesn't answer, it doesn't provide the full answer.
We need to look at how the cargo is flowing through those terminals and how they're operating.
We believe that.
Can you just tell us what your measure of efficiency is?
Because we've had quite a number of different measures of efficiency,
which have been given to us that I don't all marry up from some parties.
So the World Bank publishes their measure of efficiency.
I don't have that particular on me now, but it's a recognised measure.
And that's where we're taking our information from and our comparison from.
So we're not looking at Australian New Zealand ports or we're looking at comparable sized ports
around the world.
Oh, so you're not comparing one of our ports with Singapore or?
No, no, no, it's comparable sized ports in operations.
The other part of the pillar that we've looked at and I touched on it earlier is just
what are we doing with the infrastructure to support the ships and the terminals when they're
alongside?
What's our ability to build sort of inland hubs so that we can stage cargo in that takes the
pressure off the terminals when the ships are in and it allows the ship to come in and the
terminal will work very, very efficiently.
And the last one is really just around this developing this sustainable and safe school.
We're very much focused on the development of people, development of skill and safety
and safety culture around the operations.
Okay, questions time.
Yeah, right.
Okay, I'm going to give Simon the first crack and then I'm going to go to the next three.
But okay, I'm not seriously, I'll take it one then off that somewhere you go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So a couple of things.
You talked about efficiency of container handling.
We saw Port of Auckland with the best of intentions attempt an automation project.
It hasn't succeeded in the way they wanted, but we've seen automation be delivered in other
ports around Asia Pacific to a greater or lesser extent.
What do you think this committee should be looking at in terms of how to get the
best out of automation?
Like is it a stage thing?
Is it a scale thing?
Just pick a technology thing.
One of the things we should be thinking about.
So when we look at it, it's the best way to develop that is to use proven known technologies.
And it would be fair to say that if you look at where we've been successful in the past
and where we've developed terminals, it's by leveraging what we learned around the world
and what works in the local environment.
I don't think that there is one answer.
It's a case of looking at the model that's been run.
Is it the port, a transshipment port or a hub, a fee to port?
How much do you need to invest in that?
But really the focus needs to be on those hub ports.
So there is no easy answer, but it's a case of leveraging off experience.
And just in terms of the land-based infrastructure or inland port infrastructure,
how close does an inland port need to be to the water for it to be operationally
functionally effective?
And what kind of connections are necessary?
Are we talking about direct rail right under the crane or are we talking
like a road freight route?
How should we optimize that?
So I'll be very much on that one.
And this is around partly around an emissions discussion as well,
is the inland terminal needs to have rail infrastructure and it needs to be serviced by rail.
Part of that, one of the drivers around rail.
And then when you look at the development that we have done on Rurikura
and then the connection to the Rurikura rail side,
I think there's the fact that you can fully utilize the capacity of a container
on a rail wagon, but you can't use on a road wagon.
So you need that scale.
It needs, the terminal needs to have a strong rail marshalling area,
so it doesn't need to go direct to crane.
But the principle of an inland hub is that they,
you start collecting cargo 10 days out before the ship arrives,
but you don't want 10 days worth of vessel cargo on the terminal.
So that allows the terminal then to core the cargo in after they've worked the previous ship.
So an inland hub can be anything between four to five hours away from the terminal itself.
Where you drive true benefit is when you place that inland hub
close to the manufacturer or the processing of the product.
So then you take off, do you take away the the road ball
and you then provide the customer and the viable alternative
to attack their transport cost, but then you collect a news rail.
Very helpful insights. Thank you very much.
So an example of that might be if you've got a railway line servicing,
oh I'm going to use Fonterra as a major, major customer,
you've got a railway line pretty much directly servicing a major plant.
The railway then can take you up straight up to three hours, whatever it might be,
can still take you straight up to your marshaling yards
in your inland port and then straight on towards the ship.
It's a bit more than that to be honest.
Well a bit more than that to be fair from our view,
because if you look at major plants like Fonterra plants that are all rail enabled,
that's 100%, the container will rail and rail out.
That's how it works. If you look at a lot of the meat processing plants,
they are by the decommission deciding or they don't have a siding.
So that will never work for them. So from a line perspective that you think about,
if you put a rail siding in the middle of, again I'll use the Waikato as an example,
you've got probably within three to four hours on a truck,
you've got at least 10 plants, all individual, many different plants.
So what you do is you then put the empty container in the middle of them,
so the truck for the customers, just for that Hamilton back out to Te Kwawhiti for example,
and then they bring the fallback to Hamilton and Rukura and then it goes on rail
and to Toton or Auckland from there.
Can you just talk us through the hub and spoke bit.
So at the moment your ships just take us through because it sounds as though they're docking at a
multiple different horse that you see them, you're telling us effectively that that's not ideal,
you'd rather dock at less of them but do more work at fewer of them and then have the rest
serviced by other, either coastal shipping or rail or whatever it might be.
So there's a version of that, if you look at, for the Merce today we run essentially
five different networks through New Zealand, so we have a network that goes to Tangier and
Pelopas which is our main work, so that's our big network, so that's the southern start.
So that's the one that goes, or currently goes Auckland, Napier,
Littleton, Port Charmers, Tangier and Pelopas, so it's currently calling Napier as well for the
minute for the apples. Then if you look at another service we run which is a similar vessel
that's called the Nordenstern, and that calls Napier Nelson, Timaru, Taronga and that goes up
to North Asia, so that goes up into China and so it's more of a direct service.
The third network we run is direct service to the east coast of North America and that goes
Port Charmers, Taronga, out. Then we have a shared networks, we have one up to the west coast
which is only calls Taronga and then we have another shared network which goes to
direct into Japan which calls five ports in New Zealand.
Our view on life is if we looked at say the southern start became our main
for one of the better terminology, hub and spoke service, is that you would then use,
that would go down, come down to Taronga, Littleton for the sake of this conversation
and go to Malaysia, so spends less time on the coast means you get faster transits for those
key markets up to Pelopas and beyond, then you use the other networks to feed the cargo, so
you would still definitely need an ocean feeder for somewhere like Nelson, which is land,
land boats. You definitely need a feed of service, a coastal net. So we are talking about a coastal
shipping, because that's one of the things that we get from the coastal shipping side,
is a lot of, is you're competing on going through all those different places,
you're competing with coastal shipping, your price, your economics is much stronger than theirs,
but what you're saying is actually from your perspective, what you're doing at the moment
is not optimal. I think it's important for us to differentiate between coastal and feeder,
so what we're actually offering is a feeder network because we're only taking deep sea cargo,
so we're focusing with the customer to put our container into the airport so that they can
load it, and then we're feeding it into our mainline network. So for example, Nelson is a
classic example. We have one of our services, North Start, it'll come down into Nelson from Asia,
it's a smaller ship, so it can work Nelson easier, and we'll go in there and we'll position our
empties in there for that market. Now the apples that go from Nelson go all over the world,
so that will then pick up those apples and then take them to Toton or to
Port Chalmers to connect to the different vessels, whether they're going to the East Coast, North
America, whether they're going to Europe, where were they going. So what we're talking about here
is a feeder operation. We're not out there competing in the coastal market,
we're just putting our containers that we're going to load and around.
Dan? Thanks Tony. Just continuing on the hop and spokes model you mentioned in your
submission around section 198. I just want to get a clear understanding of,
so you're at your 5th group, so I'm guessing that section 198 applies to the new 5,
is that correct? Yes. In an ideal world, are you telling us that you think if we can
claim 198 or get rid of it, or then what does that mean for the nurse?
The 5 that you collapse at 2 or 3?
So on the principle that four of the networks are offering really for us
key direct markets as well. So the direct service to the East Coast, North America,
the direct service to the West Coast, the direct service to North Asia, from the way
our market share is working now, that will remain. The amendment to the act that we see
that would drive a better cost efficiency and that is probably the one area is the ability
to double call a port and a rotation. Can you explain that for us? Yes. So
for example, if you had
on the rotation right now, a deep sea ocean going vessel can only call
a continuous voyage. So if we say, for example, from a business customer need,
we say that we're going to come down, we're going to go to Christchurch, we can go to Timaru,
to pick cargo up in Timaru, then we're going to go back to Christchurch to load.
We're not allowed to do that because that's not continuous. Yeah, which is just, that's 198.
So that that's the reference to the act there that that change wouldn't, it wouldn't
see fewer services, it would just allow us to be more efficient. With the vessels,
you've got the balance of flows of weight of draft and imports. So you can only go in with
certain drafts into somebody's port. So you've got to be very careful about what you load.
Because New Zealand, and if you look at it, we're an export dominant country and a very large part of
our businesses and the business of all ocean carriers is your ability to put empty containers
around the coast. Yeah. So sometimes it works better if you just get a double one.
And is it your view that section 198 is kind of out of step with other markets? Like, how does it,
if we moved away from that, would it be bringing us more into line with other markets?
I think that different countries have very much different rules around what you can do on the
coast. I mean, the US have got the Jones Act. Australia have got their own, their legislation
as well. I think that the challenge that that we have in New Zealand is just the distance and the
ability and the range of options and choice. Really, if you look at it from each network,
you get one call a week. And if you can't get that right, then you're in trouble.
Versus you go to some of these wider international markets, there's a vessel every second day.
Okay. Thank you. Go on. What is the impetus behind that legislation? No, double.
They couldn't continue us. What problem was that trying to solve? And how can we
make those changes whilst still not opening up the original?
I don't know. It's a legacy. It's been there for as long as I've sort of been kicking around.
So it's very much a legacy legislation. I think that, yeah, there is,
there will be other parties that have very, very strong views.
So going back to your, you haven't spoken at the moment. So you've got the five different networks,
but what I'm hearing is that they're not the optimal arrangement. You clearly want the one
nine eight, so that you can actually do something where you go to the same port twice,
at the very least. But if you had your optimal arrangement, what would it look like?
So it wouldn't be a lot different than what you see today. In terms of, I don't see
fewer vessels come because we will maintain at least four of those strings because they
provide us with direct products into different parts of the market, which is very important for us.
Parts of the world, yeah. But the ability to use some of those smaller vessels to move cargo,
or to feed a cargo around the coast, both import and export, is the efficiency that,
or the gain that would return efficiencies back to the New Zealand market.
And do they still need, you still need a, excuse me, a range of different sizes of vessels to
service New Zealand, presumably because the destination markets are also a different
scale for us in terms of how to product going to them. Yeah. So it's a combination of markets.
It's also a combination of, if we're serving coastal ports, what size vessel can that port
handle? What's the total length it can handle? What's the total draft it can handle? So if you
look at our workhorse service, the Sun and Star, it's certainly limited to ports that can call in
and to New Zealand. So if you're looking, because we've had quite a bit of discussion about how
many, you know, how many TEU, any given port could take. So if you're looking a few years
down the track, we understand I think the vast majority now of new vessels, and I was not
looking at the vessels going to be around a while, the vast majority of new vessels are going to be
8,000 TEU plus. So you're always going to get a range of vessels. If you look at what we're
building right now, we're building in the 8,000 to 16,000 TEU range. We've got a fleet of the
23,000, 24,000 TEU range, but the model that we are running globally is quite different these days
and it's quite different from other lines. So when we use the big vessels, 24,000
TEU vessels, they're on a network called the Gemini. So they're only going to call about
five or six ports or eight ports in the world. And if you are a New Zealand exporter today,
you'd use the Southern Star, you'd go up to Malaysia to a tranship port, you then get on
one of the 24,000 TEU vessels and you'll go up to Rotterdam and put it on Rotterdam. And then in
Rotterdam, we're using the 8,000 to 16,000 TEU vessels to essentially run a bus service.
So you'd be dropped in Rotterdam and using the technology in the track, we can guarantee
connections while the two vessels are alongside working. Employee making the most out of the
technology that we have. And then it goes, it'll go to Hamburg, it'll go to Copenhagen,
it'll go to wherever that Indus Nation is. So when you started, you said that basically we want
two core ports, one in the north, one in the south. I'm trying to reconcile that with
having a range of different size vessels that are also calling it the smaller ports as well.
So the two core ports would, for example, be Totoroa and Zoltan, then you would use our North
American service that would pick up cargo from there and imports would drop the imports into
Nelson, that needed to be in Nelson, put the empties into Nelson, load the fruit out, then
take it to another port to go back to Pelopas. So it's a case of still using our existing
networks, but it's using them more efficiently. So what needs to change at those ports,
those big hub ports? So they need to improve their efficiency in their rating. They need to
improve their crane moves, they need to improve the overall throughput, because essentially what
we're going to do, we're not actually going to take volume away from the walls around, but we
are going to focus volume on those two big ports. So they need to be able to be able to step up
and handle it. Okay. Do you have any sort of other questions?
One question, just about cabotage. And I've taken the point about the
1-9-8 in the reference to continuous journey. The other sort of aspect to that is that the cargo
needs to be incidental to what is kind of on board. So we've had a few views,
different views around that, but in the carer aspect. What is your sort of acknowledgement
or thinking in that particular space? In terms of incidental.
In terms of the inclusion of cargo, so for coastal purposes, it needs to be incidental to the
loading on the vessel. There's been some suggestion, for example, that perhaps that
word shouldn't exist, but it should be more qualified in terms of quantum,
those sorts of things. So just interested in your thoughts.
So I'm not particularly right over that one, but I think very much that for us, it's about
the feeder cargo for our network. We're focused on the deep sea cargo, we're not focused on the
coastal cargo. Okay. But the fact that you are sort of on a journey around the place, still
domestic cargo is a key part of, or maybe not a key part, is a part of what you carry?
It's certainly not a key part of what we carry. What we have to balance up with is
the capacity on the vessel for our deep sea cargo. So we won't load domestic cargo
at the expense of loading the deep sea box. We also need to be very aware and cognizant of
the impact to our ability to place empties into markets. I think it's fair to say,
it is fair to say that we place a lot of empties around from Auckland and Toulon and down south.
So if there is ability to load some cargo into that, but it's not our core, it's just the
ability to move a, put a box down in the south island to load for export.
So if you were able to do, I mean, you can kind of see that in terms of sovereign resilience and
all that sort of stuff you need, you know, every nation needs to be able to have
internal transport networks. And you essentially being able to fend your own deep sea product around
the country is what you're asking for the ability to do not get involved in otherwise
other domestic capital. But what would prevent you from stifling
other ability to be able to to grow coastal shipping in capital and not rely on capital?
So our focus is full ownership to go to and from New Zealand.
When we operate around the coast, we are quite often at capacities
that we can't load, we can't load domestic cargo. So when we look at,
yeah, certainly, and when the sea is running hot and we're like right now,
when we sail somewhere like from Napier to join another vessel or when we sail south,
we're full. We're hitting our dead weight, we're hitting our numbers because it's carrying cargo
that's going to go up to Toa Ronga, be discharged and then go deep sea and then that's the space
that we load into from Toa Ronga off to other ports. So it's fair to say that, you know,
it's not, it's not, it's something that it's fair to say that it's not something that we don't look at,
but we look after, we have to look after our deep sea customers first.
I appreciate your answers and I appreciate that you're a business, but if you're saying that,
you know, your focus is on deep sea product and not the domestic stuff. Does your pricing
mechanisms for domestic cargo align with that approach? So it's not sort of an incentivisation
in terms of cost to carry domestic product or cargo in terms of the operations?
So our approach on pricing is, it's not a target to lift, so we're not going to go on price into
pure coastal cargo because it's not a priority for us. If we have a customer that has a need,
comes to us and says, look, you're doing all my deep sea, can you move something southbound,
we will look at it if it suits our needs for putting empty equipment down there.
If it doesn't suit our needs for putting empty equipment, so for example, we won't look at
coastal cargo south north because we're contained a deficit in the South Island,
so we will only focus on the deep sea cargo. Okay, helpful.
Can I just follow that up? So sending lots of empties down south, I'm assuming that is because
there is more product being created down south that needs exporting than there are
relative to north. Correct. So the nature of New Zealand is 75% of the import market
goes to the upper north island from Taupto on north and probably 20% will go in through Littleton
and then 5% through other areas. The nature of our market is heavily leveraged into dry
containers, so you're 40 foot standard containers because we're buying. That's the nature of the
import market. It's the nature of the market, so you've got your outdoor furniture, your barbecues,
your TVs, all those wonderful things that seem to be unspecialty really.
You're outbound market and when you come down the South Island, it's heavily leveraged around food,
meat, dairy, seafood, so that's a reef for export market. So everything that we can bring into New
Zealand is we have to, when we're doing our import market plan, we have to balance on the
dry cargo coming in, but we also have to bring empty reefism. The empty reef has come from different
places to feed into New Zealand so that we have the market. If you look at the South Island,
South Island is very, very strong in both refrigerated cargo, but also with the dairy
industry and dry containers as well. So we're forever moving containers around to where the
demand is for load, so that's a very important part of the balancing plan in it we do.
So 75% of the imports come from the North Island?
Yep.
Question for Tracey here. What's the volume, the volumes that you're seeing in terms of the export
side of things while in North and South?
In terms of rough percentages, it would probably be these days, it will probably be about 55%
North Island and 45% South Island.
Roughly.
And that 75% you said the first place, that was the upper North Island, we're about a lower North
Island. That's on top of that as well.
To be fair now, most of the stuff that goes into the, say, potentially over two or longer,
is covering North Island.
It's covering the whole North Island.
Pretty much covering the North Island.
So it outbounds 55, 45 North Island South Island, so it's kind of a very useful number.
And your pattern you think will be influenced by other shipping lines of service in New Zealand?
So those numbers that you think will be broadly reflective of?
Broadly reflective.
Yeah. Okay. So the bit about in and out, I mean, because we export a lot of
refrigerator goods, so reefers.
Yeah.
So we're getting a huge chunk of our container movement.
Reefers going out, then coming back empty.
And then dry goods that are largely reverse, coming in full, going back out
empty. So that can't do a whole lot when there's not much to do about it, but they can't do a
whole lot for the cost of service in New Zealand.
Yeah. I think from, I can say, from a nurse position, because of our position with
certainly one key customer in terms of our dry boxes, we're pretty good.
Using our dry boxes out.
But the empty boxes we need to bring in.
So it's a lot of milk powder that goes out of New Zealand.
Yeah.
So we're quite well.
So dry boxes aren't too bad. It's the reefers.
It's the reefers that we need to bring in.
Yeah.
The dry boxes all come into the North Island for the consumables, and then we need to
clean them up and move them down the line.
So dry boxes reasonably balanced?
Yes.
Yeah.
Okay. Somebody else got a question?
Well, I'm contemplating my next area of broad.
Well, okay, that goes well.
On your improved performance of container terminals,
you've, I've now found the efficiency measure you're using is crane moves per hour.
Yeah.
So the bit that we've also got is the number of cranes you actually apply to any given vessel
and others. How quickly you get the vessel loaded?
Yeah.
Not loaded, because obviously if you apply more cranes, they're both the same level of cranes
per hour or movements per hour. You get it out twice as quickly.
So is that the, is that the best model for you?
Because I think what we heard from Auckland, I think it was Auckland in particular, was
that efficiencies not bad, but crane moves per hour, but they only apply one of them,
as opposed to they should maybe apply two.
Yeah, that was the kind of thing that came through, I think.
Yeah, I think certainly the ports of Auckland have more than one crane on their terminal.
So it's your ability to, to lean into those cranes and use them.
You will have some challenges around the, the length of the vessel and how many cranes you can
put to a vessel.
But we, we sort of view that when we look at the terminal efficiency there is,
there's gains to be made by leveraging the learnings from some of these international
terminals and the way they operate. We tend to see that the, in the North Ennis that the,
all the measures and numbers that they use are quite internal or local
and not really benchmarking against similar port sizes around the world.
So what are the key things that we do when you've got, you've, you've made a suggestion
about granting concessions for operations to experienced operators, which is a different
model to what we've got here. But you know, what are the, what are the key changes you would see in our
ports, in our, the ports themselves to make them more efficient. And while I'm asking a question
about port, the one thing that does come through time and time again is the central
relative tower on it. And that they're a little bit short of wolf space.
I think that the conversation going around Tauranga and, and the wolf space here is,
is a very important one on one that needs to be settled.
And we can see it for stellar wolf.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
That's only part of the story though. You don't solve or hit the new heights just by making things
bigger because then potentially you make the problem bigger. So unless there's the investment
to go along with it and the investment needs to be in hardware,
cranes, straddles, the investment also needs to be around software and systems and processes
that they're using. The investment also needs to be in some of these inland ports to stage
cargo to come in. So investments quite as multi-load.
We, we firmly believe that international operators have a role to play there and an
opportunity there to come in and achieve some of those efficiencies.
You mean international operators on the port itself?
Yep. Yes.
Okay.
Just one of the things my, the other question I was going to ask was just the,
the attractiveness of New Zealand as a market to Moesk and to other shipping operators.
It's been a bit of noise about that from time to time. What does it look like for you?
So for Moesk it's a very important market for us. We have a very important agreement with
Kotahi here in New Zealand. I think that from, that agreement is super strong for,
for Moesk, super strong for Kotahi, but I think it's also super strong for New Zealand
because that underpins the, the commitment that we have down to this, this part of the world
and what we do down here. It underpins the investment that we're making with
vessels that we come down here. As I said, it's, New Zealand isn't a cheap place to come to
and operate in, but we're also aware of the role that we play. So any opportunity to do things
better, smarter or faster, that at the end of the day will drive benefits back to the New
Zealand export of the New Zealand importer. It's what we need to do. So we see, we see us as a very
important partner to New Zealand. And that's a lot, that is a long-term commitment isn't it? It's a long
contract, long-term contract, but you're obviously seeing it going, keeping on going and beyond that.
Yep, so we've just completed a 10-year cycle and renewed for another 10 years.
Correct, yeah. Colleagues at other questions, I have one that just flooded through my head,
I'm terribly wet. I'm not seeing anything, yeah. No, it's good. There will be bits.
Very clear. So anything else that you'd like to say, just to finish off with Tony?
Thank you for the opportunity. I think, yeah, we recently had the chairman of our board of the
APMOLA Group come through New Zealand. Again, that's an indication of just how we see New Zealand.
And the opportunity that we see down here, we believe that we've got a lot to offer.
And we'd like to like to see and explore those opportunities to see what we can do next.
I think it's very important. An important comment is we can't do it in isolation.
There are a number of parties and players around. So it's very, it would be very important for us
to see a clear strategy for what New Zealand looks like going forward and how, and who's going to,
then we see, really, we've got to bring that strategy together.
But we are very keen to be part of that discussion and part of that growth and development.
And we've had to say at the moment you're not seeing, you don't see a strategy at the moment.
See it at possible aspirations to one, but no strategy.
That would be fair. I think if you look around, if you look around the players,
I'll mention is that the ports are disjointed. The opportunity to do more with Kiwi Rail.
I don't, we don't see the push and the drive around that. And Kiwi Rail, we see as a very
important part of developing New Zealand. So you're not seeing that push from Kiwi Rail?
Well, it's there. But the truth or the reality for us is that the people need,
all parties need to get around the table and have one conversation.
We're having about 20 conversations. And we need that coordinating view to bring
the people together and see that view. Good. All right. I know that's another question
that I was going to ask, but thanks. It'll come to me momentarily, but I'll let everybody on.
Just as, and as we mentioned in our submission, if anyone, if any of the committee members are
traveling and would like to go and view one of our facilities around the world, please reach out.
We've got some pretty funky ones and some ones that have work in progress. But now if you're out
and about and you'd like to see what we view a good terminal looks like, we're happy to show you.
Correct. Sorry, you did mention, sorry colleagues, you did mention, you know,
what you can do next. So the what you can do next, I mean, you describe, you know, being
able to go back to different to a port twice as well. Is there anything else that's there?
And also, how does that play out in terms of the cost of the cost of importing and exporting?
So what that will do is it'll make us more efficient in terms of where we pick up
cargo. So it'll play back in cost to serve. Sorry. It plays back in our cost to serve.
But that's the one thing that we could see some benefit in the short term.
And then the mid term is around terminals, infrastructure, how they work.
Yeah. Yeah, that's very helpful. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you.